Add tutorial on accessing main ping exponential histograms (#484)
mozilla/firefox-data-docs: src/cookbooks/main_ping_exponential_histograms.md

# Visualizing Percentiles of a Main Ping Exponential Histogram

> [GLAM](https://glam-stage.bespoke.nonprod.dataops.mozgcp.net/) is great if you want to check out the behaviour of a histogram over a large population across a set of dimensions that we've thought, but what if you have a follow-up question that doesn't fit into its UI model? This tutorial will go into the guts of how to reproduce a GLAM-like view using `sql.telemetry.mozilla.org` (STMO), along with some suggestions on how to dig deeper.

Author: Yep, I think this tutorial will need to be updated in a bunch of different ways as GLAM (and probably our other tools) evolve, but hopefully the core of the content will remain relevant.

This tutorial tries to build up an understanding and intuition of how things work on a low-level before it gets to its main act of reproducing GLAM. If you don't care about the details, you can probably skip the earlier sections in this document.

Assumptions: You have some idea of what a histogram is (if not, the [Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histogram) is a great place to start), have at least skimmed over [the Firefox documentation on histograms](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/telemetry/collection/histograms.html), and have read [the introduction to STMO](../tools/stmo.md).

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->

## Setting the stage: tab spinners duration

> For the purposes of this tutorial, let's look at a typical performance-oriented histogram: [`FX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_MS`](https://probes.telemetry.mozilla.org/?view=detail&probeId=histogram%2FFX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_MS) which we use to both count the number of times a tab spinner appears after a switch tab operation in Firefox. This is an unwanted operation (especially if it's long), as it makes the browser appear unresponsive and [confuses / disturbs users](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/questions/1198062).

Author: I think I meant to say something else when I started writing this sentence, then reconsidered. I just took it out. 😄 (thanks jklukas for making the edit for me)

![](https://i.imgur.com/3MHESUa.png)
[link](https://telemetry.mozilla.org/histogram-simulator/#low=1&high=1000&n_buckets=20&kind=exponential&generate=normal)

This visualization above shows how a [normal distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution) would map into the buckets: you'll see that it biases towards the end: the point of the exponential histogram is to be sensitive to lower values (which one would assume would be more frequent, so long as the tab spinner doesn't come up too frequently!). Each "tick" represents the range of a bucket: so we have a bucket representing values between 1 and 2, 2 and 3, and so on. You'll note that this distribution caps out at 1000: for values higher than this, a separate histogram ([`FX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_LONG_MS`](https://probes.telemetry.mozilla.org/?view=detail&probeId=histogram%2FFX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_LONG_MS)) was created.

## Getting client-level data

Before we move on, let's do up a quick example of getting some client-level data using an SQL query, hopefully building up some intuition on how this stuff works on a low-level. From there, we can build up to aggregating it in interesting ways.

> As of this writing, each main ping histogram is encoded as a JSON string inside the `telemetry.main` table inside BigQuery.

Author: Not sure about this one, looking at it again, I feel like the BigQuery documentation is a bit scattered as it stands and I'm not sure if linking to it would bring any clarity here. Let's keep this in mind for the future though.

     percentiles AS
  (SELECT histogram_percentiles(spinner_visible_long_ms, [
      .05,
      .25,
      .5,
      .75,
      .95]) AS percentile_nested
   FROM merged_histogram)
SELECT percentile,
       value
FROM percentiles
CROSS JOIN unnest(percentiles.percentile_nested);
```

[link](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/71410/source)

Which gives us this set of results:

| Percentile | Value |
| ---------- | ----- |
| 0.05       | 13    |
| 0.25       | 56    |
| 0.50       | 165   |
| 0.75       | 698   |
| 0.95       | 1,000 |

So we see for this set of results that 95th percentile is `1000ms`, the 75th percentile is `698ms`, and so on.

There's a bit of intermediate-to-advanced SQL in the above query, due to the fact that the `histogram_percentiles` UDF returns an _array_ of results in a column (rather than a full-blown table) -- we wrangle the results into something we can handle using the [`UNNEST`](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/query-syntax#unnest) operator combined with a cross-join at the end. If you don't immediately understand this, don't worry: it's just an implementation detail.

> ## Creating a time series of change over time

Author: I like this formulation, I'll change the title.

          KEY,
          SUM(value) AS value,
   FROM `moz-fx-data-shared-prod`.telemetry.main,
        UNNEST(`moz-fx-data-shared-prod`.udf.json_extract_histogram(payload.histograms.FX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_MS).
               VALUES)
   WHERE application.channel='nightly'
     AND normalized_os='Windows'
     AND application.build_id > FORMAT_DATE("%Y%m%d", DATE_SUB(four_twenty, INTERVAL 2 WEEK))
     AND application.build_id <= FORMAT_DATE("%Y%m%d", four_twenty)
     AND DATE(submission_timestamp) >= DATE_SUB(four_twenty, INTERVAL 2 WEEK)
     AND DATE(submission_timestamp) <= four_twenty
   GROUP BY KEY,
            build_id),
     per_build_day_as_struct AS
  (SELECT build_id,
          STRUCT(ARRAY_AGG(STRUCT(KEY, value)) AS
                 VALUES) AS spinner_visible_ms
   FROM per_build_day
   GROUP BY build_id)

SELECT build_id,
       percentile,
       value
FROM per_build_day_as_struct
CROSS JOIN UNNEST (`moz-fx-data-shared-prod`.udf.histogram_percentiles(spinner_visible_ms, [.05,
      .25,
      .5,
      .75,
      .95]))
```

[link](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/71472/source)

> As an implementation note, observe that we don't use `histogram_merge` here as we do above: doing so would require using [`ARRAY_AGG`](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/functions-and-operators#array_agg) which can break down when processing large amounts of data. Instead we create a temporary table (`per_build_day`) by hand and then reprocess it into a structured representation. If you're curious what the version using `histogram_merge` would look like, see [this example](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/71413/source).

Author: Makes sense, thanks! I'll adjust

In any case, rendering the data this query returns, we get a chart like this:

> ![](https://i.imgur.com/HByDexv.png)

Author: I will change these to be static assets once we've verified for certain they're what we want.

     AND application.build_id > FORMAT_DATE("%Y%m%d", DATE_SUB(four_twenty, INTERVAL 14 DAY))
     AND application.build_id <= FORMAT_DATE("%Y%m%d", four_twenty)
     AND DATE(submission_timestamp) >= DATE_SUB(four_twenty, INTERVAL 14 DAY)
     AND DATE(submission_timestamp) <= four_twenty
   GROUP BY build_id,
            client_id),
     merged_histograms AS
  (SELECT build_id,
          KEY,
          SUM(value) AS value,
   FROM per_build_client_day,
        UNNEST(per_build_client_day.tab_switch_visible_ms.
               VALUES)
   GROUP BY KEY,
            build_id),
     as_struct AS
  (SELECT build_id,
          STRUCT(ARRAY_AGG(STRUCT(KEY, value)) AS
                 VALUES) AS spinner_visible_long_ms
   FROM merged_histograms
   GROUP BY build_id),
     percentiles AS
  (SELECT build_id,
          `moz-fx-data-shared-prod`.udf.histogram_percentiles(spinner_visible_long_ms, [ .05,
      .25,
      .5,
      .75,
      .95]) AS percentile_nested
   FROM as_struct)

SELECT build_id,
       percentile,
       value
FROM percentiles
CROSS JOIN UNNEST(percentiles.percentile_nested);
```

[link](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/71489/source)

> You'll notice that, in addition to the call to `histogram_normalize`, this query groups by `client_id` in addition to `build_id`: this is necessary, otherwise we would be normalizing by groups of clients sharing the same `build_id` which doesn't really make any sense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll notice this query groups by `client_id` in addition to `build_id` before `histogram_normalize`. Grouping by `client_id` gives each user equal representation and prevents "power users" from skewing the result.
```

In any case, the result of this query is this graph:

![](https://i.imgur.com/cX3deIM.png)

Things are looking much better! The 95th percentile is still capped out at 1000, but the other percentiles are much lower.

> ## Slicing along arbitrary dimensions

Reviewer: A "compare and contrast" across two different dimensions in a single time period makes more sense than a "change over time". It would be easier to interpret a bar graph where two populations can be compared directly by the height of their percentiles.

Author: Hmm, I see your point but am not sure if I agree. If you were to look at a bulk aggregated view, it wouldn't be clear that the difference was sustained. Am inclined to leave this as-is -- hopefully it won't be hard for people to modify these queries/examples into whatever visualization they prefer.

As of this writing, each main ping histogram is encoded as a JSON string inside the `telemetry.main` table inside BigQuery.

```sql
SELECT
  payload.histograms.FX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_MS AS histogram_json,
FROM
  telemetry.main
WHERE
  sample_id = 42
  AND normalized_channel = 'nightly'
  AND DATE(submission_timestamp) = '2020-04-20'
  AND payload.histograms.FX_TAB_SWITCH_SPINNER_VISIBLE_MS IS NOT NULL
LIMIT
  3
```

[link](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/71333/source)

Running this query on STMO, we get the following output:

| `histogram_json`                                                                                          |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `{"bucket_count":20,"histogram_type":0,"sum":118,"range":[1,1000],"values":{"80":0,"115":1,"165":0}}`     |
| `{"bucket_count":20,"histogram_type":0,"sum":19145,"range":[1,1000],"values":{"237":0,"340":1,"1000":1}}` |
| `{"bucket_count":20,"histogram_type":0,"sum":1996,"range":[1,1000],"values":{"698":0,"1000":1}}`          |

> In this representation, `bucket_count`, `histogram_type`, and `range` represent the number of buckets, the histogram type (as an index: 0 means exponential), and the range of possible values. `values` represents the number of instances in each of the buckets.

Author: realized that I don't actually understand what sum means for sure, getting some clarification...

> In this representation, `bucket_count`, `histogram_type`, and `range` represent the number of buckets, the histogram type (as an index: 0 means exponential), and the range of possible values. `values` represents the number of instances in each of the buckets.

Author: Thank you @travis79!
